Clarify documentation for TLS encryption setup (#55739)
elastic/kibana: docs/user/security/securing-communications/elasticsearch-mutual-tls.asciidoc

<titleabbrev>Mutual TLS with {es}</titleabbrev>
++++

Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) and Transport Layer Security (TLS) provide encryption for data-in-transit. While these terms are often used

> interchangeably, {kib} only supports TLS, which supersedes the old SSL protocols.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interchangeably, {kib} supports only TLS, which supersedes the old SSL protocols.
```

TLS requires X.509 certificates to authenticate the communicating parties and perform encryption of data-in-transit. Each certificate
contains a public key and has and an associated -- but separate -- private key; these keys are used for cryptographic operations. {kib}
supports certificates and private keys in PEM or PKCS#12 format.

In a standard TLS configuration, the server presents a signed certificate to authenticate itself to the client. In a mutual TLS
configuration, the client also presents a signed certificate to authenticate itself to the server.

> When {security} is enabled on your cluster, each request that {kib} (the client) makes to {es} (the server) must be authenticated. Most

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When {es} {security-features} are enabled on your cluster, each request that {kib} (the client) makes to {es} (the server) must be authenticated. Most
```

requests made by end users through {kib} to {es} are authenticated by using the credentials of the logged-in user. There are, however, a few
internal requests that {kib} needs to make to {es}. For this reason, you must configure credentials for {kib} to use for those requests.

If {kib} has `elasticsearch.username` and `elasticsearch.password` configured, it will attempt to use these to authenticate to {es} via the
{ref}/native-realm.html[Native realm]. However, {kib} also supports mutual TLS authentication with {es} via a {ref}/pki-realm.html[Public
Key Infrastructure (PKI) realm]. To do so, {es} needs to verify the signature on the {kib} client certificate, and it also needs to map the
client certificate's distinguished name (DN) to the appropriate `kibana_system` role.

NOTE: Using a PKI realm is a gold feature. For a comparison of the Elastic license levels, see https://www.elastic.co/subscriptions[the
subscription page].

To configure {kib} and {es} to use mutual TLS authentication:

> . *<<using-kibana-with-security,Set up {kib} to work with {security} with a username and password>>.*

Reviewer: {security} is out-dated and resolves to "X-Pack security". <product>/<stack> {security-features} is better:
```suggestion
. *<<using-kibana-with-security,Set up {kib} to work with {stack} {security-features} with a username and password>>.*
```

> . *<<configuring-tls-kib-es,Set up TLS encryption between {kib} and {es}>>.*

Reviewer: In this and all other occurrences, the bolded first sentence should not be bolded. If you want it to stand out from the rest of the big block of text, you can perhaps add an extra line break. Otherwise, I think it's diverging too much from the style of all the procedural pages across the library. It might be possible to request this as a stylesheet change across the library, however I think it would be a hard sell given that many procedures contain steps that are much less verbose than these.
```suggestion
. <<configuring-tls-kib-es,Set up TLS encryption between {kib} and {es}>>.
```

Author: Ah, alright I'll remove the bold styling. Thanks!

+
This entails generating a "server certificate" for {es} to use on the HTTP layer.

. *Obtain a client certificate and private key for {kib}.*
+
--

> {kib} will need to use this "client certificate" and corresponding private key when connecting to {es}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{kib} must use this "client certificate" and corresponding private key when connecting to {es}.
```

NOTE: This is not the same as the <<configuring-tls-browser-kib,server certificate>> that {kib} will present to web browsers.

You may choose to generate a client certificate and private key using the {ref}/certutil.html[`elasticsearch-certutil`] tool. If you

> followed the {es} documentation for {ref}/configuring-tls.html#node-certificates[Generating Node Certificates], then you likely have already

Reviewer: ```suggestion
followed the {es} documentation for {ref}/configuring-tls.html#node-certificates[generating node certificates], then you likely have already
```

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This will generate a client certificate and private key in a PKCS#12 file named `kibana-client.p12`. In this example, the client certificate
has a Common Name (CN) of `"kibana-client"` and a subject alternative name (SAN) of `"<your_kibana_hostname>"`. The SAN may be required if
you have hostname verification enabled on {es}.
--

. *Obtain the certificate authority (CA) certificate chain for {kib}.*
+
--
{es} needs the appropriate CA certificate chain to properly establish trust when receiving connections from {kib}.

If you followed the instructions above to generate a client certificate, then you will have a PKCS#12 file for {kib}. You can extract the CA
certificate chain from this file. For example:

[source,sh]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
openssl pkcs12 -in kibana-client.p12 -cacerts -nokeys -out kibana-ca.crt
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This will produce a PEM-formatted file named `kibana-ca.crt` that contains the CA certificate from the PKCS#12 file.
--

> . *Configure {es} with a PKI realm and a Native realm.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. *Configure {es} with a PKI realm and a native realm.*
```

+
--

> By default, {es} provides a Native realm for authenticating with a username and password. However, to support both a PKI realm (for {kib})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, {es} provides a native realm for authenticating with a username and password. However, to support both a PKI realm (for {kib})
```

> and a Native realm (for end users), you must configure each realm in `elasticsearch.yml`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and a native realm (for end users), you must configure each realm in `elasticsearch.yml`:
```

TIP: If your PKCS#12 file isn't protected with a password, depending on how it was generated, you may need to set
`elasticsearch.ssl.keystore.password` to an empty string.
--

.. Otherwise, if your certificate and private key are in PEM format:
+
--
Specify your certificate and private key in `kibana.yml`:

[source,yaml]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
elasticsearch.ssl.certificate: "/path/to/kibana-client.crt"
elasticsearch.ssl.key: "/path/to/kibana-client.key"
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If your private key is encrypted, add the decryption password to your <<secure-settings,{kib} keystore>>:

[source,yaml]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
bin/kibana-keystore add elasticsearch.ssl.keyPassphrase
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--

. *Configure {kib} _not_ to use a username and password for {es}.*
+
You must remove the `elasticsearch.username` and `elasticsearch.password` settings from `kibana.yml`. If these are present, {kib} will

> attempt to use them to authenticate to {es} via the Native realm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
attempt to use them to authenticate to {es} via the native realm.
```
